there's nothing like the sound of a car
engine starting especially when it's 15
below on a winter morning
today's automotive batteries are smaller
more powerful and more efficient even at
extreme temperatures it's all thanks to
the power of lithium-ion cell technology
while dissecting a frog in 1786 the
Italian researcher Galvani noted that
when his scalpel touched a leg muscle it
contracted from an electric current
produced later Volta believed the
current was produced by the metal
instruments the animal being only a
conductor to prove it he stacked discs
of zinc and copper connected by
conductors and fabric impregnated with
an acid solution and so in 1800 the
electric battery was born
batteries power all kinds of electric
motors a new lithium metal polymer
battery packs such as this one could
soon power an electric automobile as
well as a hybrid vehicle this battery
will be made up of four components it
all starts with this lithium ingot which
weighs about 11 pounds it is transformed
into a thin sheet by this extrusion
press that applies 440 tons of pressure
the press creates a sheet that's only
about 1/100 of an inch thick the whole
extrusion sequence is closely
computer-controlled extrusion is now
completed the metallic lithium shoe is
to required 1/100 of an inch thick the
sheet has to be further thin placed on a
roller it is carried to the laminator at
room temperature it is thin once again
in just 20 minutes the 11 pound England
will have been transformed into a thin
sheet 0.01 inches wide and some 655 feet
in length this laminator completes the
thinning of the sheet the resulting one
and a quarter mile long sheet will allow
for the fabrication of 210 battery units
lithium is a soft sticky metal for this
reason a polypropylene film has to be
fixed onto the lithium sheet without
this protection the sheet would adhere
to itself and become unusable the sheet
will be used to make individual battery
cells then these cells will be assembled
in series and in parallel and inserted
into modules of different shapes to make
an individual battery cell this sheet
has to be rolled up this automated
spooling machine winds up the lithium
film in 26 revolutions the wound-up
sheet is put into a vacuum of them where
the various layers adhere firmly to one
another this step lasts for about 90
minutes at 176 degrees
here a test is made using a voltmeter
the battery is checked to see that it
produces the required three point five
six volts any problem can be detected
here and corrected a final quality check
is made with this calibre it precisely
measures the thickness of the battery
cell the battery cells are then stored
metallic plates are placed between them
for the entire storage period one more
step remains and that's the metal izing
of the contacts the battery cells are
sent off to a fabrication facility in
this container the container is
robotically handler first it's put into
a protective tank then the metal izing
of the contacts is done by spraying on
molten metal this takes just a few
seconds since the metal cools very
quickly
the battery is now finished it is
comprised of four elements lithium which
acts as the anode a metallic oxide
cathode a dry solid polymer electrolyte
and a metallic current collector all
that remains to be done is the
assembling of the individual battery
cells into a module it begins with the
placing of individual cells onto one
another and isolating them with foam so
that they did not touch each other these
red sheets are actually heating elements
since the lithium metal polymer cells
function at temperatures of between 104
and 176 degrees
here we see these modules of the battery
pack for a hybrid vehicle an automobile
that works with a gasoline-powered motor
and an electric motor this prototype
battery was created for a totally
electric vehicle it surpasses heavy
traditional lead acid batteries that
can't develop the same amount of
electrical energy and have much shorter
lifespans